Add Event Sourceing example for redis (#1)
pdambrauskas/event-sourcing: event-sourcing-redis/Readme.md

# Event Sourcing with Redis
It is a common practice to use asynchronous messaging technologies to implement communication between multiple microservices.

> It helps to have scalable, fault tolerant and decoupled architecture. In my personal project and also at work I had some experience

Reviewer: You could elaborate a little bit more (a sentence or so) on how "It helps".

> in implementing asynchronous communication by using Apache Kafka. Kafka is go-to solution when it comes to streaming pipelines and 

Reviewer: I would switch these two sentences places and few minor changes to the first one:

> In my personal project and also at work I had some experience in implementing asynchronous communication by using Apache Kafka. Kafka is go-to solution when it comes to streaming pipelines and publish/subscribe systems.

with

> Kafka is go-to solution when it comes to streaming pipelines and publish/subscribe systems. I have implemented asynchronous communication using Kafka several times both at work and working on personal projects.

> publish/subscribe systems. But there are many alternatives. One of them is newest Redis datatype - Redis Streams, which came in Redis version 5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
publish/subscribe systems. But there are many alternatives. One of the latest implementations is Redis datatype - Redis Streams, which came in [version 5.0](https://redislabs.com/blog/redis-5-0-is-here/).
```

[Redis Streams](https://redis.io/topics/streams-intro) may look very similar to traditional Redis Pub/Sub concept, however it is quite different:
- stream can have multiple consumers, every new entry on a stream will be delivered to every consumer (unless consumers belong to same consumer group);
- consumed messages do not disappear, Redis stores streamed data and last consumed *id* for each consumer group,
 so new consumer groups can consume group from the beginning.
 
 In theory Redis Streams work very similar to Kafka topics, and can be used for same use cases.
 You can find many resources on how to use Kafka for Event Sourcing ([example](https://www.confluent.io/blog/event-sourcing-cqrs-stream-processing-apache-kafka-whats-connection/)),

>  but when you look at the alternatives, choice is limited. So I decided to contribute to filling in this resource gap :).

Reviewer: What do you mean by "choice is limited"? Are you referring that there are very few options on how to implement Event Sourcing and CQRS or that there are only few examples on how to do such a thing using other technologies than Kafka? You should be more specific.

>  On this post I will try to describe how to use Redis Streams for [Event sourcing](https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In this post, I will try to describe how to use Redis Streams for [Event sourcing](https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html)
```

 & [CQRS](https://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html).
 
 ## Redis Streams API theoretical example

>  Lets say we have a REST API endpoint for GET'ing user social media profile, with personal information,  liked pages, list of users' friends, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Lets say we have a REST API endpoint for GET'ing user social media profile, with personal information, liked pages and list of users' friends.
```

 For that we'll have three different Redis Streams:

>  - `user_updates` stream consists of user profile updates, every time user changes his birth date, name or other personal information, entry is published to this stream;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `user_updates` stream consists of user profile updates. Every time the user changes his birth date, name or other personal information, entry is published to this stream;
```

>  - `user_activity` every time user writes a comment, reacts to some post, or does some other thing, what people do on facebook, entry is published to this stream;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `user_activity` every time user writes a comment, reacts to some post, or performs any other action (that is available in Facebook), entry is published to this stream;
```

>  - `user_friends` every time user gets or loses a friend, entry is published to this stream.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `user_friends` every time user gets or loses a friend, entry is published to this stream;
```

 
### Filling up event streams
So, we would publish our events by using `XADD` command:
```shell script
XADD user_updates * user_id 1 command register name Duffy surename Duck
XADD user_updates * user_id 2 command register name Bugs surename Bunny
XADD user_activity * user_id 1 command build object Wall
XADD user_activity * user_id 1 command dislike object Mexico
XADD user_friends * user_id 1 command add friend_id 2
```

### Reading messages from event streams
Now we can read all streams and build up user snapshot, using `XREAD` command:
```shell script
XREAD STREAMS user_updates user_activity user_friends 0 0 0
```

> And you'll get output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your output should look like this:
```

```shell script
1) 1) "user_updates"
   2) 1) 1) "1577650357114-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "register"
            5) "name"
            6) "Duffy"
            7) "surename"
            8) "Duck"
      2) 1) "1577650371803-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "2"
            3) "action"
            4) "register"
            5) "name"
            6) "Bugs"
            7) "surename"
            8) "Bunny"
2) 1) "user_activity"
   2) 1) 1) "1577650378926-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "build"
            5) "object"
            6) "Wall"
      2) 1) "1577650384649-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "dislike"
            5) "object"
            6) "Mexico"
3) 1) "user_friends"
   2) 1) 1) "1577650389616-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "add"
            5) "friend_id"
            6) "2"
```

### Building snapshots
When building profile representation, you can transform and represent it in any structure you need.

> Notice, the three zeroes at the end of the command. Those are entry ids, which can be seen as consumer offsets, when you are using `XREADGROUP` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice, the three zeroes at the end of the command. Those are entry IDs, that are used as consumer offsets when you are using `XREADGROUP` command.
```

> Entry IDs by default are represented as timestamps, with nanoseconds part after dot, so it is easy to read stream from any point in time you need. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Entry IDs by default are actually timestamps, with nanoseconds part after the dot. That means it is easy to read the stream from any point in time. 
```

> In most cases you might want to save user profile snapshots, it is not efficient to consume whole stream each time you query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases, it is inefficient to consume the whole stream every time you need data. It is a common practice to save your user profile snapshots in one way or another.
```

For snapshoting you can use Redis Hash data structure (or one of other Redis structures, if that makes sense for you).
Hash structure can be created by using `HMSET` command

> (you can set multiple hash fields for aggregated data, it is skipped on this example), the suffix of Hash key is user id:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(you can set multiple hash fields for aggregated data, it is skipped in this example), the suffix of Hash key is user id:
```

```shell script

> HMSET user_snapshot_1 name Donal ... [field value]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HMSET user_snapshot_1 name Donald ... [field value]
```

```

### Continuous consumption

> But you don't want to keep track of offsets, you have already consumed, right? Redis has a solution for this problem too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But you don't want to keep track of offsets, you have already consumed, right? Redis has a solution to this problem too.
```

What you can do is use `XREADGROUP` along with `XACK`. Pseudocode for whole snapshoting process would look something like this:
```
XGROUP CREATE user_updates snapshotter 0
XGROUP CREATE user_activity snapshotter 0
XGROUP CREATE user_friends snapshotter 0
WHILE true
    entries = XREADGROUP GROUP snapshotter event_consumer BLOCK 2000 COUNT 10 STREAMS user_updates user_activity user_friends > > >
    if entries == nil
        puts "Timeout... try again"
        CONTINUE
    end

    FOREACH entries AS stream_entries
        FOREACH stream_entries as message
            process_message(message)
            XACK message.stream snapshotter message.id
        END
    END
END
```

## Java example

I've also implemented Java App to illustrate how to use Redis Streams for Event Sourcing. I chose to use lettuce library for communication with Redis server.
You can find Source code on [Github](https://github.com/pdambrauskas/event-sourcing/event-sourcing-redis)

There are three main classes:
- EventStore - this class can be used for event publishing, and subscribing to Redis Streams;
- SnapshotStore - this class can be used to store and retrieve snapshot objects from Redis;

> - StreamProcessor - combines EventStore and Snapshot store. You can supply multiple event handlers, which are used while building snapshots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- StreamProcessor - combines EventStore and Snapshot store. You can supply multiple event handlers, which are used for building snapshots;
```

> Whole combination of these classes can be found on RedisEventSourcingTest Unit test class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The whole combination of these classes can be found in RedisEventSourcingTest unit test class.
```

# Event Sourcing with Redis
It is a common practice to use asynchronous messaging technologies to implement communication between multiple microservices.

> It helps to have scalable, fault tolerant and decoupled architecture. Kafka is go-to solution when it comes to streaming pipelines and publish/subscribe systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It provides scalable, fault tolerant and decoupled architecture. Kafka is go-to solution when it comes to streaming pipelines and publish/subscribe systems.
```

Reviewer: If I understood the idea, this is more appropriate and leaves no place for misinterpretation.

You can easily scale microservice architecture by running multiple instances of your microservice in same consumer group, easily add new consumers without modifying existing communication-related code,

> take advantage of persistence of Kafka topics by re-consuming them any time you need and have many more advantages over traditional http communication protocol. 

Reviewer: Change this sentence to bullet points. I.E. 
Main advantages over traditional HTTP communication protocol:
- You can easily scale microservice architecture by running multiple instances of your microservice in same consumer group.
- Easily add new consumers without modifying existing communication-related code.
- Take advantage of persistence of Kafka topics by re-consuming them any time you need

I have implemented asynchronous communication using Kafka several times both at work and working on personal projects

> des. But there are many alternatives. One of the latest implementations is Redis datatype - Redis Streams, which came in Redis [version 5.0](https://redislabs.com/blog/redis-5-0-is-here/).

Reviewer: What is `des`?

```shell script
XREAD STREAMS user_updates user_activity user_friends 0 0 0
```

Your output should look like this:
```shell script
1) 1) "user_updates"
   2) 1) 1) "1577650357114-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "register"
            5) "name"
            6) "Duffy"
            7) "surename"
            8) "Duck"
      2) 1) "1577650371803-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "2"
            3) "action"
            4) "register"
            5) "name"
            6) "Bugs"
            7) "surename"
            8) "Bunny"
2) 1) "user_activity"
   2) 1) 1) "1577650378926-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "build"
            5) "object"
            6) "Wall"
      2) 1) "1577650384649-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "dislike"
            5) "object"
            6) "Mexico"
3) 1) "user_friends"
   2) 1) 1) "1577650389616-0"
         2) 1) "user_id"
            2) "1"
            3) "action"
            4) "add"
            5) "friend_id"
            6) "2"
```

### Building snapshots

> When building profile representation, you can transform and represent it in any structure you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When building profile representation, you can transform and reflect it in any structure you need.
```

Hash structure can be created by using `HMSET` command
(you can set multiple hash fields for aggregated data, it is skipped in this example), the suffix of Hash key is user id:
```shell script
HMSET user_snapshot_1 name Duffy ... [field value]
```

### Continuous consumption
But you don't want to keep track of offsets, you have already consumed, right? Redis has a solution to this problem too.
What you can do is use `XREADGROUP` along with `XACK`. Pseudocode for whole snapshoting process would look something like this:
```
XGROUP CREATE user_updates snapshotter 0
XGROUP CREATE user_activity snapshotter 0
XGROUP CREATE user_friends snapshotter 0
WHILE true
    entries = XREADGROUP GROUP snapshotter event_consumer BLOCK 2000 COUNT 10 STREAMS user_updates user_activity user_friends > > >
    if entries == nil
        puts "Timeout... try again"
        CONTINUE
    end

    FOREACH entries AS stream_entries
        FOREACH stream_entries as message
            process_message(message)
            XACK message.stream snapshotter message.id
        END
    END
END
```

## Java example

> I've also implemented Java App to illustrate how to use Redis Streams for Event Sourcing. I chose to use lettuce library for communication with Redis server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I've also implemented Java App to illustrate how to use Redis Streams for Event Sourcing. I chose to use [lettuce](https://github.com/lettuce-io/lettuce-core) library for communication with Redis server.
```

> You can find Source code on [Github](https://github.com/pdambrauskas/event-sourcing/event-sourcing-redis)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Source code of my implementation can be found on [Github](https://github.com/pdambrauskas/event-sourcing/event-sourcing-redis)
```

There are three main classes:
- EventStore - this class can be used for event publishing, and subscribing to Redis Streams.
- SnapshotStore - this class can be used to store and retrieve snapshot objects from Redis.
- StreamProcessor - combines EventStore and Snapshot store. You can supply multiple event handlers, which are used for building snapshots.

The whole combination of these classes can be found on RedisEventSourcingTest Unit test class.

## Concludion
While Redis Streams is relatively new concept, it is heavily inspired by Apache Kafka, and has many overlapping features. Also we mustn't forget that

> Redis has many more data structures and features, which can be used alongside Redis streams (one of which we so on snapshoting example in this post).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redis has many more data structures and features, which can be used alongside Redis streams (one of which we used for the snapshotting example in this post).
```
